Fixes #10912 - Document Request listeners (#10920)
eclipse/jetty.project: documentation/jetty-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/programming-guide/server/http/server-http-handler-implement.adoc

Failing to do so may result in the `Handler` `callback` parameter to never be completed, causing the request processing to hang forever.
====

[[pg-server-http-handler-impl-request-listeners]]
====== `Request` Listeners

Application may add listeners to the `Request` object to be notified of particular events happening during the request/response processing.

`Request.addIdleTimeoutListener(Predicate<TimeoutException>)` allows you to add an idle timeout listener, which is invoked when an idle timeout period elapses during the request/response processing, if the idle timeout event is not notified otherwise.

When an idle timeout event happens, it is delivered to the application as follows:

> * If there is pending demand (via `Request.demand(Runnable)`), then the demand `Runnable` is invoked and the application may see the idle timeout failure by reading from the `Request`, obtaining a xref:pg-arch-io-content-source[transient failure chunk].

Reviewer: Should we document here that read IdleTimeouts are non-terminal and that reads can be attempted again and/or demand made.

Author: Documented at the link.

> * If there is a pending response write (via `Response.write(boolean, ByteBuffer, Callback)`), the response write `Callback` is failed.

Reviewer: Should we say that write idles are terminal because it is unclear how much data has been written?

Reviewer: Should we make the idleTimeout chunk last==true if there was a write pending?

Reviewer 2: > Should we make the idleTimeout chunk last==true if there was a write pending?

I don't think so, as there could be some use-case where some handler wants to read as much of the request's data as possible, even if it cannot write a response, if only for logging or forensics purposes.

Reviewer: @lorban but doesn't that let users attempt to retry writes as well?

Failing to do so may result in the `Handler` `callback` parameter to never be completed, causing the request processing to hang forever.
====

[[pg-server-http-handler-impl-request-listeners]]
====== `Request` Listeners

Application may add listeners to the `Request` object to be notified of particular events happening during the request/response processing.

> `Request.addIdleTimeoutListener(Predicate<TimeoutException>)` allows you to add an idle timeout listener, which is invoked when an idle timeout period elapses during the request/response processing, if the idle timeout event is not notified otherwise.

Reviewer: Is there an e.g. of how an idle timeout event can be otherwise notified?

Is that really the case?   Isn't the idle listener always called to ask if the idle timeout can be ignored or not?

Author: The examples of `otherwise notified` are detail in the next paragraph as a bullet list.

It is really the case that the listener is not invoked if otherwise notified.
A read will receive a transient failure and decide to ignore it.
A write is likely fatal, but only fails the write callback (although the write cannot be resumed, and further writes will likely fail).
So we need to invoke the listener only if there was nothing pending.

The idle timeout listener is invoked only when:

* There is no pending demand for request content; that is, there is not an outstanding call to `Request.demand(Runnable)`.

> * There is no pending response write; that is, there is not an outstanding call to `Response.write(boolean, ByteBuffer, Callback)`.

Reviewer: Is this new behaviour?  I thought the point of the idle callback was the boolean, so that it could be ignored in some situations....   or are all the situations in which we ignore it when we don't have a read or a write pending?

Author: It's not new behavior, been there even before #10844.

In the above cases, the application is notified of the idle timeout so there is no need to call the idle timeout listeners.
In the first case, the demand `Runnable` is invoked and the application will see the idle timeout failure by reading from the `Request`, obtaining a xref:pg-arch-io-content-source[transient failure chunk].

> In the second case, the response write `Callback` will be failed.

Reviewer: Can we flip this section around so that we describe how the idle timeout is delivered with the bullet point saying what it is.
Something like:

> when an idle timeout occurs it is delivered to the application as follows:
> + If there is pending demand...
> + if there is a pending response...
> + if neither of the above...

The idle timeout listeners are therefore invoked only when the application is really idle, neither trying to read nor trying to write.

> An idle timeout listener may return `false` to indicate to the Jetty implementation that the idle timeout should be ignored, and `true` to indicate that the idle timeout should be treated as a fatal failure of the request/response processing.

Reviewer: It is not really ignored, as the app might handle it.  How about:
```suggestion
An idle timeout listener may return `true` to indicate that the idle timeout should be treated as a fatal failure of the request/response processing; otherwise the listener may return `false` to indicate that no further handling of the timeout  is needed from Jetty.
```

> When an idle timeout listener returns `false`, and another idle timeout period elapses, and the application is idle, the listener is invoked again.

Reviewer: Not exactly, because a read or write might commence during the next period.   So you just need to say:
```suggestion
When an idle timeout listener returns `false`, then any subsequent idle timeouts are handled as above.
```

In case of many idle timeout listeners, they are invoked in the same order they have been added.
The first idle timeout listener that returns `true` stops the Jetty implementation from invoking the idle timeout listeners that follow.

> 

Reviewer: Can we have a sub heading break to split the various listener sections?

Author: Unfortunately no, we are already at the max of depth.
This will likely change when we restructure the documentation.

* At least one idle timeout listener returned `true` to indicate to the Jetty implementation to treat the idle timeout as a fatal failure.
* There are no idle timeout listeners.

Failures reported to a failure listener are always fatal failures; see also xref:pg-arch-io-content-source[this section] about fatal versus transient failures.

[NOTE]
====
Applications are always required to complete the `Handler` callback, as described xref:pg-server-http-handler-impl[here].
In case of asynchronous failures, failure listeners are a good place to complete (typically by failing it) the `Handler` callback.
====

`Request.addCompletionListener(Consumer<Throwable>)` allows you to add a completion listener, which is invoked at the very end of the request/response processing.
This is equivalent to adding an `HttpStream` wrapper and overriding both `HttpStream.succeeded()` and `HttpStream.failed(Throwable)`.

Completion listeners are typically (but not only) used to recycle or dispose resources used during the request/response processing, or get a precise timing for when the request/response processing finishes, to be paired with `Request.getBeginNanoTime()`.

> Note that while failure listeners are invoked as soon as the failure happens, completion listeners are invoked only at the very end of the request/response processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that while failure listeners are invoked as soon as the failure happens, completion listeners are invoked only at the very end of the request/response processing: after the `Callback` passed to `Handler.handle(Request, Response, Callback)` has been completed and all container dispatched Threads have returned.
```

Author: Your addition is not strictly correct: a large write may still be pending when the callback is completed and the threads have returned.
I added "all writes have completed" -- the 3 legged stool.
